
History of Sugar Plantations Slavery began due to the need for workers on farms and plantations within the new world. Native populations began dying out fast and cheap labor became a necessity for many mines and farms to prosper. African rulers began trading African slaves to merchants and traders from the Middle East, Europe, Asia and the Americas. Slaves left from various ports as they traveled across land and sea to reach their destinations. Some of the largest ports were the Senegambia, Sierre Leone, Windward Coast, Ivory Coast, and Gold Coast. Selling over 5 million slaves from their locations, Between 1140-1870 11 million slaves were transported from Africa to Brazil, Europe, the west indies, and the Spanish empire. 6 million slaves were sent to sugar plantations, 2 million for coffee plantations, 1 million for mines. Sugar plantations proved highly profitable. A total of 54,200 cargo ships were sent to various countries. During the span of the 350 years of the Atlantic Slave Trade many of the slaves sold were Women and young girls who were often sexually assaulted and mutilated. Several African slaves were branded, flogged and castrated. This violence aided in the dehumanization of Black lives and inherently supported the idea of Black people as a lesser race, this ideal would be key to the justification of the use of convict labor after the abolition of slavery 1865.

The coffins and caskets found among the buried lots were in extremely poor condition. Despite this fact the condition of the bone material recovered from the burial sites was extremely well preserved. According to Convict guard Sergeant R. J. Ritichi, the coffins were simple pine boxes that were built within the camp with rough lumber. The names and numbers of the convict laborers were painted on the headboards while the laborers were buried in new or clean suits. Majority of the grave shafts were buried in the western direction which was based primarily upon Christian tradition. Some graves that were dug with significantly less care than others resulted in disarticulation and jumbling of skeletal elements within the burials.  Three individuals were buried in narrow coffins and two in wide coffins. There were signs of displaced and jumbled skeletal elements without uneven floors, evidence of shifting of the bottom panels of the coffin, and the low water table that did not inundate the burials all indicate and support decay before burial. 

Demand for black labor post-civil war led to an influx of convict labor programs primarily in the South. The Convict Labor system was almost completely exclusive to African Americans and was used primarily to imprison newly freed slaves. Motives changed from reforming criminal behavior to increasing profits while escaping government speculation.  As convicts quickly began to overcrowded prisons, many of these prisons would “lease” these convicts to plantations, railroads, turpentine camps, and mines. The Motive for convict leasing was simple: the need for more labor increased the already abundant racism in the south and promoted a new way for white officials to manage freed slaves.  Texas was a major hotspot when it came to convict leasing activity.  Convict leasing became a desirable way to produce cash crops.  Vagrancy laws were extremely powerful at the times as they gave county officials the power to arrest, fine, and force “vagrants” to commit to manual labor under the convict leasing system to pay said fines. A vagrant was described as any “idle person, living without any means of support, and making no exertion to obtain a livelihood, by any honest employment.” Officials had the power to force many freed slaves back into a system of manual labor under these vagrancy laws.   Convict leasing would come to an end around the 1890s as Mississippi was the first state to abolish this system. This would rapidly lead to the decline of convict leasing in the early 1900s as many progressive reformers desire change.  By the end of WW1, leasing would end across the South. 

Among the tools and binding materials found within the burials were numerous common use items such as cloth buckles, buttons, wedding ring made of copper alloy, tobacco pipe, coffee dispenser, wooden die  This wedding ring most likely belonged to one of the many married or widowed convict laborers Over 600 nails were found to have been used within the wooden coffins used to bury the dead convicts Numerous bullets were found to have been buried within the coffins Stone and iron shods (cutting materials used for farming sugarcane) were also discovered within the coffins. 

Of the 95 bodies found within Bullhead Camp Cemetery there are detailed record of 72 laborers. Sentences ranged from as little as 2 years to as much as 25 years. Laborers originated from all across the United States including Alabama, Texas, Missouri. 32 of the laborers were married while 3 were widowers. Detailed record on the lives of Seaborn Froch, Esau Powell, and Ben Franklin  

The sex of the convict laborers were estimated based on coxae morphology and cranial dimorphic features (proportion of skull sizes). Bullhead Camp Cemetery was estimated to be an almost exclusive male group compared to others such as the Freedman’s Cemetery which contained an almost even split between sexes. Sex estimates were calculated for 97 individuals: 86 were male, six couldn’t be assigned to a sex category, three were probable males, one was a female, and one was a probable female. Dental data included visual and metric assessments for each skeleton, each tooth was assessed for series of morphological observations and the root numbers and congenital absences.  Any remains with pathological changes and trauma were radiographed and CT scanned to gain further insight. Scans were also used to retain a 3D representation of significant pathological and trauma skeletal anomalies and complete skulls, to be able to conduct facial reconstruction on complete skulls - X-Rays were taken on Nov. 2-3, 2018. CT scans were taken on Sept. 15, 2018  Age at death estimation was based on auricular surface observations.  Some victims couldn’t be aged due to the absence of skeletal elements necessary to determine age. Few elderly convicts were sent to the plantation due to the availability of younger individuals and the physical demands required.  

The frequencies of lesions (Cribra orbitalia & poratic hyperostosis) indicate that these individuals suffered from nutritional deficiencies before arriving at the cemetery and highlight the unsanitary conditions and nutritional inadequacy of the food provided at the camps. High intake of corn, a lack of milk and greens were present in the skeletal remains of those in the cemetery. Some individuals suffered from Otitis externa - inflammation of the ear canal. Causes of death varied widely. Most were related to heart issues, fevers, and forms of congestion. The majority of the causes did not leave skeletal changes because they were quick, unless there were underlying chronic conditions that contributed to the individual’s susceptibility to the condition. Instances of heart failure, heart paralysis, heart disease, and internal hemorrhage could potentially be associated with the nutritional deficiencies and malnutrition evident at the Bullhead Camp Cemetery. Malnourished individuals were also more susceptible to sun strike, and illnesses such as pneumonia and malaria. Perimortem gunshot trauma attests to the power & authority of the prison guards. Historic records indicate that gunshot trauma was attained while the individuals were trying to escape from the camp. Other trauma may also be associated with punishment or lashes received at the prison camp. The 

trauma also indicates that these individuals likely led a hard life before they arrived at the prison. The crushing fracture provides evidence of the dangerous labor required to grow and mill. 